Chapter 7 (#7)
Andarist/total-typescript-book: book-content/chapters/07-mutability.md

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
type AlbumGenre = "rock" | "country" | "electronic";

// ---cut---
let albumGenre = "rock";

const handleGenre = (genre: AlbumGenre) => {
  // ...
};

handleGenre(albumGenre);
```

Because `let` was used when declaring the variable, TypeScript understands that the value can later be changed. In this case, it infers `albumGenre` as a `string` rather than the specific literal type `"rock"`. In our code, we could do this:

```ts twoslash
let albumGenre = "rock";

// ---cut---
albumGenre = "country";
```

Therefore, it will infer a wider type in order to accommodate the variable being reassigned.

We can fix the error above by assigning a specific type to the `let`:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
type AlbumGenre = "rock" | "country" | "electronic";

// ---cut---
let albumGenre: AlbumGenre = "rock";

const handleGenre = (genre: AlbumGenre) => {
  // ...
};

handleGenre(albumGenre); // no more error
```

Now, `albumGenre` _can_ be reassigned, but only to a value that is a member of the `AlbumGenre` union. So, it will no longer show an error when passed to `handleGenre`.

But there's another interesting solution.

#### How TypeScript Infers `const`

> When using `const`, the variable is _immutable_ and cannot be reassigned. When we change the variable declaration to use `const`, TypeScript will infer the type more narrowly:

Author: i wouldnt be surprised if somebody would take away from this that objects declared using `const` are immutable too but that's not true. I'd adjust the lingo used here to avoid mentioning immutability.

Objects are mutable in JavaScript, meaning their properties can be changed after they are created.

For this example, we have an `AlbumAttributes` type that includes a `status` property with a union of literal values representing possible album statuses:

```typescript
type AlbumAttributes = {
  status: "new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick";
};
```

Say we had an `updateStatus` function that takes an `AlbumAttributes` object:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
type AlbumAttributes = {
  status: "new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick";
};
// ---cut---
const updateStatus = (attributes: AlbumAttributes) => {
  // ...
};

const albumAttributes = {
  status: "on-sale",
};

updateStatus(albumAttributes);
```

TypeScript gives us an error below `albumAttributes` inside of the `updateStatus` function call, with messages similar to what we saw before.

This is happening because TypeScript has inferred the `status` property as a `string` rather than the specific literal type `"on-sale"`. Similar to with `let`, TypeScript understands that the property could later be reassigned:

```typescript
albumAttributes.status = "new-release";
```

> This is true even though the `albumAttributes` object was declared with `const`. We get the error when calling `updateStatus` because `status: string` can't be passed to a function that expects `status: "new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick"`. TypeScript is trying to protect us from potential runtime errors.

Author: > This is true even though the `albumAttributes` object was declared with `const`

I feel like this should be explained explicitly here - less experienced readers might get lost here as it seemingly contradicts some of the things said earlier. I know that this section also mentions smth like:
> Objects are mutable in JavaScript, meaning their properties can be changed after they are created.

but I still feel like it might be a little bit hard to connect the dots here

#### The `Readonly` Type Helper

If you want to specify that _all_ properties of an object should be read-only, TypeScript provides a type helper called `Readonly`.

To use it, you simply wrap the object type with `Readonly`.

Here's an example of using `Readonly` to create an `Album` object:

```typescript
const readOnlyWhiteAlbum: Readonly<Album> = {
  title: "The Beatles (White Album)",
  artist: "The Beatles",
  status: "staff-pick",
};
```

Because the `readOnlyWhiteAlbum` object was created using the `Readonly` type helper, none of the properties can be modified:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2540
type Album = {
  title: string;
  artist: string;
  status?: "new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick";
  genre?: string[];
};

const readOnlyWhiteAlbum: Readonly<Album> = {
  title: "The Beatles (White Album)",
  artist: "The Beatles",
  status: "staff-pick",
};
// ---cut---
readOnlyWhiteAlbum.genre = ["rock", "pop", "unclassifiable"];
```

Note that like many of TypeScript's type helpers, the immutability enforced by `Readonly` only operates on the first level. It won't make properties read-only recursively.

### Readonly Arrays

> As with object properties, arrays and tuples can also be made immutable by using the `readonly` modifier.

Author: i never thought about it before but it's interesting that `readonly` modifier for arrays/tuples is applied on the whole thing - making all elements readonly - while in objects we can apply that only on property level

```typescript
function printGenresReadOnly(genres: readonly string[]) {
  // ...
}

function printGenresMutable(genres: string[]) {
  // ...
}
```

When we create a mutable array of genres, it can be passed as an argument to both of these functions without error:

```typescript
const mutableGenres = ["rock", "pop", "unclassifiable"];

printGenresReadOnly(mutableGenres);
printGenresMutable(mutableGenres);
```

This works because specifying `readonly` on the `printGenresReadOnly` function parameter only guarantees that it won't alter the array's content. Thus, it doesn't matter if we pass a mutable array because it won't be changed.

However, the reverse is not true.

If we declare a read-only array, we can only pass it to `printGenresReadOnly`. Attempting to pass it to `printGenresMutable` will yield an error:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
function printGenresReadOnly(genres: readonly string[]) {
  // ...
}

function printGenresMutable(genres: string[]) {
  // ...
}

// ---cut---
const readOnlyGenres: readonly string[] = ["rock", "pop", "unclassifiable"];

printGenresReadOnly(readOnlyGenres);
printGenresMutable(readOnlyGenres);
```

> This is because we might be mutating the array inside of `printGenresMutable`. If we passed a read-only array.

Author: That's technically not exactly true. It's not because the function could mutate the array inside. If that were true then this would be illegal too:
```ts
type ReadonlyObj = { readonly foo: string }

function changeObj(obj: { foo: string }) {
  obj.foo = 'bazinga'
}

const obj: ReadonlyObj = { foo: 'bar' }

changeObj(obj) // it would be an error if the above statement would be true
```

The reason why it's illegal to pass a readonly array to a spot expecting a mutable array is purely structural. Just like you mentioned, the readonly ones don't have `push`, `pop` and maybe some other things too. So it's as if you'd try to do this:
```ts
function require2Props(obj: { a: number, b: string }) {}

require2Props({ a: 42 }) // error
```

Author: But also... we might actually get a new tsconfig option that will help people to benefit from a stricter set of rules: https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/pull/58296

We can get around this by giving the property a type annotation. But it still doesn't infer the literal type of the property.

```typescript
const albumAttributes: AlbumAttributes = {
  status: "on-sale",
};

// hovering over albumAttributes shows:
const albumAttributes: {
  status: "new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick";
};
```

Instead of `albumAttributes.status` being inferred as `"on-sale"`, it's inferred as `"new-release" | "on-sale" | "staff-pick"`.

One way we could get TypeScript to infer it properly would be to somehow mark the entire object, and all its properties, as immutable. This would tell TypeScript that the object and its properties can't be changed, so it would be free to infer the literal types of the properties.

This is where the `as const` assertion comes in. We can use it to mark an object and all of its properties as constants, meaning that they can't be changed once they are created.

```typescript
const albumAttributes = {
  status: "on-sale",
} as const;

// hovering over albumAttributes shows:
const albumAttributes: {
  readonly status: "on-sale";
};
```

> The `as const` assertion has made the entire object deeply read-only, including all of its properties. This means that `albumAttributes.status` is now inferred as the literal type `"on-sale"`.

Author: It might be worth noting here that it will only work for "fresh" parts of `as const`ed object: [TS playground](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play/?#code/MYewdgzgLgBAZiEMC8MDeAoGMBGBDAJwC4YAiUgGgwF8BuDDUSWEHAKxXS3kSupjwQYTaPQwB6cTAACUCAFoApgA8ADouBQlBAiAIZWbAHQIkqTNnzEyYRQHdKNMYZOIjVzgHJ8ALwCWYADmeACEYZ4wGEA)

  if (!result.ok) {
    return [new Error("Could not fetch data.")] as const; // added as const here
  }

  const data = await result.json();

  return [undefined, data] as const; // added as const here
};
```

With these changes in place, when we check the return type of `fetchData` in the `example` function, we can see that `error` is inferred as `Error | undefined`, and `data` is `any`:

```typescript
const example = async () => {
  const [error, data] = await fetchData();

  // ...
};

// hovering over error shows:
const error: Error | undefined;

// hovering over data shows:
const data: any;
```

In the case of this challenge, without `as const`, TypeScript is making two mistakes. Firstly, it's inferring each of the returned arrays as _arrays_, not tuples. This is TypeScript's default behaviour:

```typescript
const data = await result.json();

const result = [undefined, data];

// hovering over result shows:
const result: any[];
```

We can also see that when `undefined` is placed into an array with `any`, TypeScript infers the array as `any[]`. This is TypeScript's second mistake - collapsing our `undefined` value so it all but disappears.

> However, by using `as const`, TypeScript correctly infers the return value as a tuple (`Promise<[string | undefined, any]>`). This is a great example of how `as const` can help TypeScript give us the best type inference possible.

Author: ```suggestion
However, by using `as const`, TypeScript correctly infers the return value as a tuple (`Promise<readonly [Error] | readonly [undefined, any]>`). This is a great example of how `as const` can help TypeScript give us the best type inference possible.
```

    }
  | {
      readonly type: "submit";
    }
)[];
```

The `buttonsToChange` array is also no longer being inferred as a tuple with a fixed length, so we can modify it by pushing new objects to it:

```typescript
buttonsToChange.push({
  type: "button",
});
```

This behavior stems from tagging the individual members of the array with `as const`, instead of the entire array.

However, this inference is good enough to satisfy `modifyButtons`, because it matches the `ButtonAttributes` type.

##### Option 3: `as const` on strings

The last solution we'll look at is using `as const` on the string literals to infer the literal type:

```typescript
const buttonsToChange = [
  {
    type: "button" as const,
  },
  {
    type: "submit" as const,
  },
];
```

Now when we hover over `buttonsToChange` we've lost the `readonly` modifier, because `as const` is only being targeted at the string inside of the object, not the object itself:

```typescript
// hovering over buttonsToChange shows:
const buttonsToChange: (
  | {
      type: "button";
    }
  | {
      type: "submit";
    }
)[];
```

But again, this is still typed strongly enough to to satisfy `modifyButtons`.

> When using `as const` like this acts like a hint to TypeScript that it should infer a literal type where it wouldn't otherwise. This can be occasionally useful for when you want to allow mutation, but still want to infer a literal type.

Author: A neat trick is to also know how to infer a tuple using `as const` without making the tuple itself readonly. That can be done using `as const satisfies unknown[]` but you haven't introduced `satisfies` yet... so probably not worth mentioning it here
